content/quickref/new_lab_member.md, before:

---
title: New Lab Member
author: Murray Cadzow
date: '2020-12-2'
slug: new-lab-member
categories: ["howto"]
tags: ["howto", "tutorials","reference"]
weight: 0
enableToc: yes
tocLevels:
  - h2
  - h3
  - h4
---


# Orientation

A (sort of) induction for new members to the lab to help them get up and running

## Things that need to be sorted out for physical access

- ID card loaded into door access system
- key (if applicable)
- Lab health and safety brief
- Dept health and safety

## Comms

- email
  - added to lab list
  - lab meetings
- invited to lab Slack
- [merrimanlab.github.io](https://merrimanlab.github.io)


## Computer access

- Lab computer assigned
  - Create user
- Biochem credentials for printing and server access
- SNPmax login (if applicable)
- Github account
  - create account
  - added to lab Org


### Computer setup

Once local computer and Biochem accounts have been set up:


- `ssh`
  - set up ssh config
  - set up `.bashrc`
  - set up `.Rprofile`
  - Introduction to the `module` system
- walk-through of XSan structure and what lives where
- R and RStudio
  - make sure gets updated


Very useful introduction courses to get some base level skills that are needed 

- [Shell](http://swcarpentry.github.io/shell-novice/)
- [Version control using Git/Github](http://swcarpentry.github.io/git-novice/)
- [Data analysis and visualisation in R](http://www.datacarpentry.org/R-ecology-lesson/)
- [Best practice spreadsheets for use later in R](http://www.datacarpentry.org/spreadsheet-ecology-lesson/)
- [Rmarkdown](http://rmarkdown.rstudio.com/)

Commit message:

explaination of merrimanlab.github.io

content/quickref/new_lab_member.md, after:

---
title: New Lab Member
author: Murray Cadzow
date: '2020-12-2'
slug: new-lab-member
categories: ["howto"]
tags: ["howto", "tutorials","reference"]
weight: 0
enableToc: yes
tocLevels:
  - h2
  - h3
  - h4
---


# Orientation

A (sort of) induction for new members to the lab to help them get up and running

## Things that need to be sorted out for physical access

- ID card loaded into door access system
- key (if applicable)
- Lab health and safety brief
- Dept health and safety

## Comms

- email
  - added to lab list
  - lab meetings
- invited to lab Slack
- [merrimanlab.github.io](https://merrimanlab.github.io)

[merrimanlab.github.io](https://merrimanlab.github.io) is a collation of many how-to's for the lab as well and provides some reference material. It's purpose is to supplement knowledge after asking a question.


## Computer access

- Lab computer assigned
  - Create user
- Biochem credentials for printing and server access
- SNPmax login (if applicable)
- Github account
  - create account
  - added to lab Org


### Computer setup

Once local computer and Biochem accounts have been set up:


- `ssh`
  - set up ssh config
  - set up `.bashrc`
  - set up `.Rprofile`
  - Introduction to the `module` system
- walk-through of XSan structure and what lives where
- R and RStudio
  - make sure gets updated


Very useful introduction courses to get some base level skills that are needed 

- [Shell](http://swcarpentry.github.io/shell-novice/)
- [Version control using Git/Github](http://swcarpentry.github.io/git-novice/)
- [Data analysis and visualisation in R](http://www.datacarpentry.org/R-ecology-lesson/)
- [Best practice spreadsheets for use later in R](http://www.datacarpentry.org/spreadsheet-ecology-lesson/)
- [Rmarkdown](http://rmarkdown.rstudio.com/)
